## Example 5.5: Infinite Variance

The estimates of ordinary importance sampling will typically have infinite variance, and thus unsatisfactory convergence properties, whenever the scaled returns have infinite variance—and this can easily happen in off-policy learning when trajectories contain loops. A simple example is shown inset in Figure 5.8. There is only one nonterminal state s and two actions, end and back. The end action causes a deterministic transition to termination, whereas the back action transitions, with probability 0.9, back to s or, with probability 0.1, on to termination. The rewards are +1 on the latter transition and otherwise zero. Consider the target policy that always selects back. All episodes under this policy consist of some number (possibly zero) of transitions back to s followed by termination with a reward and return of +1. Thus the value of s under the target policy is thus 1. Suppose we are estimating this value from off-policy data using the behavior policy that selects end and back with equal probability. The lower part of Figure 5.8 shows ten independent runs of the first-visit MC algorithm using ordinary importance sampling. Even after millions of episodes, the estimates fail to converge to the correct value of 1. In contrast, the weighted importance-sampling algorithm would give an estimate of exactly 1 everafter the first episode that was consistent with the target policy (i.e., that ended with the back action). This is clear because that algorithm produces a weighted average of the returns consistent with the target policy, all of which would be exactly 1.